>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
Did you know that giving is
actually good for your health?
I once heard Oprah say that the
greatest way to self-healing
is to help others.
And this is exactly what my
guest has done, Cynthia Kersey.
She is the Chief
Humanitarian Officer
of the Unstoppable
Foundation, which
is exactly what Cynthia
is, unstoppable.
Her mission is to ensure that
every child on the planet
receives access to the
life-long gift of education.
She's done this through
the Unstoppable Foundation.
It has already funded
over 65 schools
and educated-- it educates
6,000 children a day.
You have done such an amazing
job with your foundation,
and I'm so grateful
that you are here.
Thank you.
>>CYNTHIA KERSEY: Thank
you for having me.
I appreciate it.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
So, how did this
all start for you?
Tell me the story.
Your 50th birthday, right?
>>CYNTHIA: Right, exactly.
Well, prior to that, I went
to this rural African women
conference.
I got invited to go
to this conference.
And the only thing that I
knew that was happening there
is that women from rural
Africa were coming together
to share their stories.
That's the only
thing that I knew.
>>LISA: How did you get invited?
>>CYNTHIA: A friend
knew the organizer.
So I knew one person.
She said she was going to go.
And I just really
felt led to go.
It was kinda crazy.
>>LISA: Like a calling.
>>CYNTHIA: A calling.
So I just rearranged my
schedule and booked this flight
and flew over to Kenya.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CYNTHIA: And then I got
on this bus with 40 women
from North America,
and we spent two days
on the bus going into the
interior of Kenya-- you know,
bumping up and down and no,
what's it called, suspension.
>>LISA: Right.
>>CYNTHIA: And it was
interesting, Lisa,
because I was
noticing myself kind
of getting a little
more annoyed.
You know, when you're
sitting on the bus,
it's like First World
problems, right?
And I was thinking, God help
me get over my little self
so I don't miss why
I'm here, because I
knew I was there for a reason.
>>LISA: You don't just fly to
Kenya and go on a two-day bus.
I mean, let's just
back up for a second.
I mean, I can understand
going to a conference
in your hometown.
What was going on in your
life to make you actually
take that trip?
>>CYNTHIA: Right.
Well, it's interesting, because
I'd really already experienced
many, many projects.
You know, when I wrote my
first book, "Unstoppable,"
18 months after it came out,
I got separated and divorced
from my husband of 20 years.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CYNTHIA: And my mentor
was Millard Fuller,
the founder of
Habitat for Humanity.
And when I called him and
told him what had happened,
he said, why don't you build
a house for a family in need?
And the key thing
that he said to me
is, when you have a
great pain in your life,
you need a greater purpose.
So that was the catalyst.
And I decided that 100
houses building in Nepal
was bigger than my pain.
So that year, where I'm
having a brand new book out,
I would go out and talk
about this project.
And I raised $200,000 that year.
And I took a group of
18 people to Nepal,
and it completely
changed my life.
That was the first
major experience
with the power of giving.
So after that happened,
then I was consistently
doing other projects.
And my second book, "Unstoppable
Women," came out in 2005.
So I was kind of looking
for another project.
So when I was invited
to the conference,
it resonated at some level.
>>LISA: So that's what got you
to fly all the way to Africa
and to get on the bus.
And what did you find
when you got to Kenya?
>>CYNTHIA: So that's
such a great question.
So basically, I met--
well, first of all,
these women greeted us,
and we were dancing.
And you can just see their faces
and their-- the love and just
their open-heartedness.
And I met two women,
Rose and Jawaher.
Rose is about 60, in her 60s.
And Jawaher is early
20s, with a baby.
And those women, I
fell in love with them.
And what was interesting
is, of course,
the surroundings
were very rural.
Big, huge roaches, and I
mean all sorts of things.
And yet, when I was there,
I felt like I was in heaven.
>>LISA: Really?
>>CYNTHIA: Really.
>>LISA: Because of
the love that you--
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
Nothing was missing.
So all of the stuff that I had
about, you know, getting there
and being with all of
these women, I mean,
literally the women
from North America,
I was kind of seeing myself
as not a group person.
Whatever that is about.
But when I got there, it was
like everything fell away.
And I was completely present and
in the moment with these women.
>>LISA: Would you
say that that was
a bit of an awakening for you?
I mean, just a cosmic,
conscious cracking open?
>>CYNTHIA: Yes.
Absolutely.
>>LISA: That was your calling.
>>CYNTHIA: It was
a huge calling.
And what I was
really struck by is,
number one, how
empowered they were.
So they came together-- they
were looking not for a handout,
but looking for
solutions to things
we never even have
to think about.
How do they get
access to clean water?
How do they treat
their children when
they get malaria or
waterborne illnesses?
I mean, all sorts of
issues we don't deal with.
How do you deal with their
crops and preserve food
with consistent and
persistent drought?
And the number one thing
they were looking for
is how do we get our
kids into school?
>>LISA: Really?
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah
>>LISA: Did they express this
to you when you were there?
>>CYNTHIA: Yes.
Over and over and over.
And what I was really taken
by is, number one, first off,
how optimistic and how
empowered they were.
Because when I looked
at their situation,
I felt pretty much overwhelmed.
I thought, wow, how could
they be so optimistic?
>>LISA: And loving and open?
Yes.
>>CYNTHIA: And they're
there not as a victim
but looking for solutions.
And the other piece
was I thought, wow,
you know, how is this right that
they're born in a place where
they don't even know
if their-- you know,
how to get education
for their own child.
And I'm born in a country
where it's given to everyone.
>>LISA: Assumed.
Yes.
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah, and
children and many people
don't even take it for granted.
So it just really struck
me, the injustice of that.
>>LISA: It's just
a matter of where
you were born
determines your fate.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
And think about
the United States,
and especially when you meet all
of these extraordinary people,
we have access to everything.
>>LISA: Well, looking at
the videos and the slides
that we're about to
take a look at really
showed the women just walking
seven, eight miles a day.
>>CYNTHIA: Right.
One way.
>>LISA: One way.
>>CYNTHIA: One way.
>>LISA: To go to
a muddy riverbank.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: To pull out muddy water.
>>CYNTHIA: Dirty.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It wasn't like a stream--
>>CYNTHIA: Contaminated.
That's right,
contaminated water.
And carry it on their back.
And they do that multiple times
a day, the women and the girls.
>>LISA: And so there is
no time for education.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: You are raised
to support the village.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: And this is your fate.
You're in survival.
>>LISA: So did you
make a conscious choice
to want to change the
fate of these villagers?
>>CYNTHIA: So what I said
to them is I said-- I did.
I fell in love with them.
I gave them
everything that I had.
We weren't supposed
to give them anything.
I literally gave them my bra.
I gave them my gym shoes.
It was like, OK, this
is what I have now.
And then I promised them
I would do something.
And I didn't know
what it was, but I
knew I had to do something.
And I came home and
started doing some research
and really got
education is the key.
>>LISA: So you
landed on education.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: And it helped
all the other things,
which we're going
to learn about.
>>CYNTHIA: Exactly.
>>LISA: All right.
So the conference that
you went to-- and here's
a picture of you in this-- at
this African women's conference
here.
You met these
women, and these two
women on either side of
you, are these the women--
>>CYNTHIA: Grace
is on the right.
And Jawaher is on the left.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
>>CYNTHIA: Isn't that beautiful?
>>LISA: All right.
So you learned that there was
a global education crisis.
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah.
So I come back and I start
doing some of my own education
around this issue.
And really got-- it
is a global problem.
When you think about
57 million children
in the world who don't even have
a primary education, and just
to give a little
context, that would
be every child in the
United States 14 years
of age and younger.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CYNTHIA: Can you imagine?
I mean, we all know someone--
>>LISA: That's how
many 57 million is.
>>CYNTHIA: That's how
>>LISA: Per year
you're talking about.
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah.
Around the world, that's right.
And 43% of all of those children
are in the sub-Saharan Africa.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CYNTHIA: 43%.
So when people say why Africa,
first off, I'm called to it.
I went there.
And the need is the greatest.
It's kind of like triage,
with an emergency room,
you look for where is
the need the greatest,
and you start there.
>>LISA: The biggest density of
children are in that area, 43%.
>>CYNTHIA: 43%.
>>LISA: But it's
explainable when
you talked about how
their days are spent.
So to change this trajectory
for these children
is no small effort.
So we're continuing
to learn that.
>>CYNTHIA: Yes.
>>LISA: So now
that you've learned
that it's a global
education crisis, what
happens when these people
don't have an education?
What is the result in their--
>>CYNTHIA: Well, it's like,
no matter how hard they try,
no matter how
committed they are,
they will never be able
to change anything.
So they'll never be able to
lift themselves out of poverty.
They'll never be able to
really pursue their dreams,
actualize their dreams,
even get a good job.
If you can't read or write,
what is the possibility
for your life?
>>LISA: Well, you
stay in the village.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
And you're in survival.
It's all about surviving.
So kids, they are taken out of
school to work with the animals
or work to earn money.
>>LISA: In the
fields or whatever.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right,
so they can survive.
>>LISA: And they're
taught their traditions,
but they're never able to get
out of the cycle of poverty
that they've lasted in for--
>>CYNTHIA: Forever.
Generations and generations
and generations.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
So when we have that area,
say, of the world that's
in that level of
poverty, how does that
affect the rest of the world?
And this next slide shows.
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah.
Well, I love this because
we think in North America,
or certainly in
developed countries,
well, how does it impact us
when a child is uneducated?
And at the end of the
day, uneducated children
are a breeding ground for
terrorism, political unrest,
global epidemics and pandemics.
>>LISA: Violence.
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah, exactly.
Terrorism.
And we are all at risk.
When you think about
57 million children,
that is a lot of children.
And we can't create
a global society
that works for
everyone thinking we're
going to leave all
those children behind.
>>LISA: Right.
And that they just don't exist.
Absolutely.
So when you found out-- let's
address really quickly the idea
about the pandemic and
the health care situation.
So there's no health
care whatsoever.
>>CYNTHIA: None.
None.
Or marginal.
>>LISA: Only if it comes
in from outside areas.
>>CYNTHIA: Oh, right.
Exactly.
>>LISA: Yeah.
So when you have that
level of poverty,
you have children that
have malaria, that contract
different types of viruses.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: And there's no
curing those viruses.
They just spread rampantly.
>>CYNTHIA: Or there may be some
sort of facility hours away.
So you know, I've just
seen-- experienced children--
the Gates Foundation, he
called it impatient optimists.
And it was this
video of this mother
who her little girl had malaria.
And so they walked for
days with this mom,
and then they caught a van.
And on the way to the
hospital, the little girl died.
And that is a very common thing.
Imagine if your child is sick,
and there's nowhere to go.
And you hold that baby, and
you're walking for days.
>>LISA: Just for a solution.
Just for some medicine.
>>CYNTHIA: Something.
That's right.
For a price of a cup of
coffee, they could be cured.
>>LISA: Cured.
Fascinating.
So when you end this
type of poverty cycle,
just take one
person, for example,
how does it change their life?
If you just start
to educate a child,
what difference
begins to happen?
>>CYNTHIA: Well, I mean,
there's so many stories.
So I have-- I mean, it's
like-- well, I was gonna--
I don't know if we
want to jump ahead,
but there's a couple of stories.
Like, even the
Chris Mburu story.
I don't know if you want
me to talk about that now.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>CYNTHIA: Let's
talk about this,
because that's really relevant.
So here's a kid about
25 miles from Nairobi.
>>LISA: We have
a picture of him.
>>CYNTHIA: There he is.
There you go.
Love this.
Anyway, so he's 25 miles
outside in a little village
in Nairobi, grown up in this
little thatched roof hut.
His parents are living on,
I think it's $0.40 a day.
So he's in and out of school,
because no matter how hard
he studies-- and basically,
his mom said, listen.
Your way out of this survival
is through an education.
And no matter how hard he
worked, how committed he was,
that would not
keep him in school.
Only money will do that,
because they pay school fees.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
So even in very extreme
poverty communities,
they still have to pay-- many
of them have to pay school fees.
>>LISA: They have to
pay to go to school.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
It's not a lot, but when
you're making $0.40 a day--
>>LISA: It's a lot.
>>CYNTHIA: It's a lot.
>>LISA: And it takes
the children off of--
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
So basically, he's
in and out of school,
hoping he'll get
out of the fields
one day so that he can
actually really get
that education he needs.
Well, across the
world is Hilde Back.
And Hilde Back was
raised in Nazi Germany.
She was now living in Sweden.
And because of the
kindness of a stranger,
he paid for her and her
family to escape Nazi Germany,
or they would have died.
And so she was looking
for a way to give back.
>>LISA: To pay if forward.
>>CYNTHIA: Pay it forward.
And he-- she heard about
this Kenyan educational fund,
and she heard about Chris Mburu.
And she thought, you know what?
I'm going to pay
his school fees.
So every month, she
would pay really
something that she felt was very
nominal, kept paying his fees.
And year after year, she
never misses a payment.
And here Chris is, he is
able to stay in school.
And basically what that
looks like is he's in school,
but after school,
he's doing his chores.
And he's not studying until
late at night by candlelight.
But he's committed.
And at that time,
she didn't realize
that she was giving him
more than an education.
She was giving him really a hope
for a whole different future.
So Chris Mburu, talk about what
can education do for one child.
He ended up graduating from
primary school and then
secondary school.
He was able to go to college.
And he was able to get the
resources to go to Harvard.
>>LISA: Oh my God.
>>CYNTHIA: And
graduate from Harvard.
And he became an
advocate, of course,
for children who have
no-- had no voice.
And he started an
educational fund, just
like what Hilde had done--
and had given money to.
And it's called the Hilde
Back Educational Fund.
And now he's paying it
forward by giving hundreds
of children access
to an education.
And he became very
inspired to meet Hilde.
And he started looking for her.
And he traveled all the
way around the world
to tell her that
she was his hero.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>CYNTHIA: And she
said she didn't
feel like she was a hero.
She was just doing
what she could.
And yet the ripple effect
of her consistent investment
not only changed Chris'
life but really now
thousands of other
children's lives.
That's from one child
getting an education.
>>LISA: It's interesting
that her last name is Back,
because that's exactly
what she did is give back.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's amazing how-- now, when
she donated the money through
your foundation--
>>CYNTHIA: It wasn't
through our foundation.
>>LISA: Oh, it was another--
>>CYNTHIA: No, no.
That was a different foundation.
Because this was
a long time ago.
>>LISA: But along the lines of
foundation, how did she know,
or how would one know--
and I'm sure you've
been asked this a zillion
times-- does it go directly
into the community?
>>CYNTHIA: Well, obviously it
did, because it paid his fees.
And he was able
to go to school--
>>LISA: Come back to her.
>>CYNTHIA: So it came back.
And it was like this
visual representation.
We have ways of connecting
people, our donors,
to the impact, too,
which is important.
But I think that's living proof.
>>LISA: Yeah, that it can
be-- that the difference can
be made, and the
money can go directly
into the people that need it.
Because that's what
you want to know
is that this money is really
going to help somebody.
>>CYNTHIA: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And you-- you're there in
Africa how many times a year?
>>CYNTHIA: Well,
it really depends.
We're there at least twice.
And we have people on
the ground full time.
And we go over there, and we
document every single project.
So we are-- we have the
implementing partners
that implement all the programs.
And then we manage it, we
oversee it, we take pictures,
we document it, and then
we bring information
back to the donors, so that
they're connected to it.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
So how much would
it take to actually
educate those 43 million--
>>CYNTHIA: 57 million.
>>LISA: 57 million.
>>CYNTHIA: So that's
a great question.
And studies say that it
would cost about $15 billion
every year to
educate every child.
Now, that sounds like a
lot of money-- actually,
they say $11 to 15 billion.
It sounds like a lot of money,
but when you think about it,
we spent twice that last
year in North America
alone on ice cream.
>>LISA: Well, think about all
the billion-dollar industries
out there.
Beauty is a
billion-dollar industry.
>>CYNTHIA: Yes.
Beauty, we spent $160
billion on skin care.
>>LISA: That doesn't even work.
>>CYNTHIA: Or $60 billion
trying to lose weight.
Or $45 billion dollars
feeding our dogs and cats.
And I'm not saying
any of that's wrong,
but the point is
the money is there.
It's there.
We just need to have the
will, the collective will.
>>LISA: In North America.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
And giving people ways
they can plug in that
feel really good about
what they're doing.
Because what we know
is people love to give.
They feel good.
>>LISA: As I mentioned earlier--
and it also, as Oprah said,
it's one of the
greatest ways-- you
use the example of self-healing
to actually be a contribution
and to turn around, and just to
contribute to something so much
bigger than us.
>>CYNTHIA: Oh my gosh,
it changes everything.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
OK, so then when
you went to Kenya
and you realized that
that was-- after you
did all your
research, you realized
that was the greatest
need, how did you then
mobilize into this foundation?
What was the catalyst for that?
>>CYNTHIA: Great,
great question.
So basically, again, I looked
at who is doing the work.
What kind of model really works?
Because so many
great organizations
will build schools, and
then you can go back two,
three years later,
and they're empty.
So what I did was--
well, first off,
can I talk a little bit
about the birthday party?
So basically what
happened-- let's
just step back for a second.
So, I was doing
all this research,
really got education is the key.
And then I'm thinking, well,
how can I do something?
So my first step was-- six
years ago, I had a big birthday.
It was my 50th birthday.
And what was kind of interesting
about it is at the time,
I was actually feeling
a little depressed
about having my
50th birthday, which
is kind of-- talk about
a First World problem.
It's kind of insane.
People are happy to make
it to their 50th birthday
in other places
around the world.
But I just had
this thing about it
and was looking at what
do I really want to do?
And I'm at Debbie Ford's
house for Thanksgiving.
And she was telling me
about her son Beau, who
for his Bar Mitzvah
instead of getting gifts
asked people to donate
money to help at a school.
And literally, Lisa,
I sat up on the couch
and I thought, that's
what I'm going to do.
I'm going to use my birthday
and ask people to donate money.
And that's exactly what I did.
I charged them $100.
And then when they came,
it was in Marina Del Ray
at Shanghai Red's,
at the restaurant.
And then I asked them for money
again, but it was not for me.
It was for these children,
and we raised enough money
to build two schools in Uganda.
>>LISA: Oh my
gosh, in one night.
>>CYNTHIA: In one night.
So that was the beginning.
And then I started
really looking, OK,
how do I scale this?
And really, who's doing
the work over there?
And the partner that we found
in the Maasai Mara in Kenya
is fantastic.
And they have a track record.
And the programs that they were
implementing were in alignment.
>>LISA: And they follow through.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
That's right.
And so that's where we started
making a huge investment.
>>LISA: Now, when did you
come up with the five pillars
and realizing it's not just the
schools that you need to help
but every-- all of these other--
>>CYNTHIA: Well, yeah.
I mean, there are
several organizations
that get this is critical.
So people who are really
successful in development,
especially in these
particular communities, really
get you need to do
all five pillars.
Although a lot of
people don't do that.
They'll do water or
they'll do schools.
And so we found--
Free the Children
is our implementing
partner in Kenya.
And they were doing a four
pillar model at that point.
And then it's
expanded to the five.
So we were really in alignment.
They implemented a model that
we believed in and supported,
and it was a perfect
relationship.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
So the five pillars are
education and clean water and--
>>CYNTHIA: Clean
water sanitation.
>>LISA: And then the food
and nutrition, teaching them
how to grow, reharvest.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
Organic gardens, healthy living.
There are so many
tenants to really
having a healthy
life and a lifestyle.
>>LISA: And then
the health care.
So bringing in--
>>CYNTHIA: Mobile
health clinics.
>>LISA: Vaccinations.
>>CYNTHIA: Every single month.
That's right.
All sorts of things.
De-worming.
I mean, it's really
basic health care
that makes a huge difference.
And then there are two
bigger health care clinics
that are fantastic, and
they just now implemented
a child birth center, which
is just amazing, because so
many women in this particular
area, the highest mortality
in the world because
of childbirth.
>>LISA: Wow.
Well, you talk a
little bit about that,
around the children
literally 10, 11 years old,
these girls are forced
off to be married.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: And explain how and
why that situation occurs.
>>CYNTHIA: So
basically, they don't
see a possibility
for their girls.
If there's not an
education, then how
are they going to
be taken care of?
And they see the boys that
they'll be able to continue.
But the girls, a
lot of girls, they
don't keep their
girls in school.
>>LISA: Why are the boys
able to continue more?
>>CYNTHIA: Well, I don't--
I think there's something--
first off, they see the girls
as needing to stay at home
to support the family.
So they are the ones that
are fetching the water.
They're the ones that are even
fetching firewood and really
helping preserve the family.
And so they feel like the only
way to keep their girls healthy
is to marry them off.
And then also they get a dowry.
So they get money when they're
marrying their child off,
and that's another kind
of survival mechanism.
And when these girls
are getting married,
they're having babies at an
age where their body is not
really ready to give birth.
So a high percentage
of the children
have-- either they
die in childbirth,
or they have all sorts
of complications.
And once you start having a
baby, it's like the cycle,
you never get out of it.
You never get out of it.
>>LISA: So they-- the
children, which are still
children at 11, 12 years
old, are having babies.
And then they're not
birthing the children
because they die in childbirth.
So this is a
perpetual cycle that's
been going on for
years and years.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: When you're breaking
such a major cycle like this,
it takes a huge initiative.
>>CYNTHIA: It really does.
>>LISA: I mean, just to start
with something like education.
>>CYNTHIA: It really does.
And everybody has
to be on board.
So we're not going
into these communities
and pushing any
kind of ideologies
or any kind of a-- our
solution or religion.
It is a-- We are met.
They're standing with us.
They are committed to
keeping their kids in school,
keeping their girls in school.
So it's really a
partnership, which
is really important
for long term change.
>>LISA: There's a picture here
of one of the schoolhouses.
And this is what they
look like basically
before you got to them, right?
This is a typical
schoolhouse there.
>>CYNTHIA: And the one on the
right, it's still being used.
So this classroom
is being used today.
And you can see, it's sorely
a dilapidated-- it's dark.
You've got mud floors.
And they've put
hundreds of children.
They'll just cram them.
>>LISA: Hundreds into that room.
>>CYNTHIA: Into these
little rooms, yeah.
>>LISA: And they're all ages.
>>CYNTHIA: They're all ages.
And they'll teach one grade
on one blackboard and then one
grade on the other.
So it's just havoc.
>>LISA: Wow, loud.
>>CYNTHIA: It's loud.
That's right.
>>LISA: And there's no windows.
Regardless of the
environment, there's
one group learning
here and another group
there and another group there.
So there's many different
ages, 100 in that one room.
>>CYNTHIA: Yes.
>>LISA: I could see
the need for that.
All right.
So you've implemented
these schools,
and you're actually
building new structures now.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
That's right.
>>LISA: And then let's
talk about the clean water
and the sanitation.
We've got a picture here of the
girls when they are actually--
this is the river that
I was talking about.
>>CYNTHIA: We've
taken those pictures.
Those are pictures at the
river with little girls
and the mothers who are--
it is quite arduous.
We've taken people over
there, donors and partners.
And most of the women who we
take over there cannot carry
the 40 pounds of dirty
water on their back.
It's too heavy.
And the women are doing it
with babies, the young girls.
We will see little girls
with a little teeny can.
It's like, they start when
they're four or five years old
with these little water jugs
that the little girls are
carrying at a very young age.
>>LISA: They start
very early learning
how to carry these big jugs.
And then they bring them back.
And then how do they
sanitize the muddy water?
>>CYNTHIA: Well, hopefully
they're boiling it.
So that's part of the education
process that you asked about.
So, and you know,
well, you know,
sanitation is a
very important part.
Clean water and sanitation
go hand in hand.
So you have to teach
people about the importance
of your hand washing
and boiling that water.
>>LISA: The last thing
they're going to do
is wash their hands, though.
Once they've got clean water,
they're going to cook with it.
They're going to drink it.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: That's the last thing
that they're going to do,
thus the spread of disease.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
That's exactly right.
So at the schools, we
have hand washing stations
with soap and then this
jar, and then it opens
and the water comes out.
It's kinda-- with a bucket.
And then kids are constantly--
because I mean, think about it.
They don't even have toilet
paper in the latrines.
And I don't think
you've got a slide here,
but the latrines, the
old latrines were--
and a lot of girls
in these communities
are not allowed to go to
school because they're not
allowed to share a
latrine with a boy.
So that was another reason that
girls would-- after you get
a certain age, or if
they're menstruating,
they weren't allowed
to go to school.
So now we are building
latrines for girls and boys.
That's right.
So they've got their own place.
>>LISA: Again, the things
we take for granted here,
the girls restroom,
the boys restroom.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: Yes.
It doesn't even exist.
And so you're supporting them
in having a place to actually go
to the restroom as
they're in school.
>>CYNTHIA: That's
right, so if they're
having their time of the month,
they can still come to school.
>>LISA: And so now
let's talk a little bit
about-- we have a slide
here of the health
care and the nutrition.
So there is-- other than not
having any access to vaccines,
or if they do get
malaria, having
a vaccination for
malaria ahead of time,
you're bringing those
types of things in.
>>CYNTHIA: There's no
vaccination, unfortunately,
for malaria.
But the deworming, there's
also-- treating them
when they get-- one
out of five children
die of waterborne
illnesses before the age
of five years old.
So dysentery, diarrhea
is a huge problem.
So what we do is we provide
mobile health clinics
that go into the communities.
And you should see it.
It's amazing, you'll see
hundreds of children lining up,
ready to be either, you
know, whatever the services
that they're providing.
And it makes a huge difference.
>>LISA: We have a slide here
of-- isn't that beautiful?
>>CYNTHIA: Look at those faces!
>>LISA: Yeah, of
getting the clean water.
And this is coming from a well?
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
Yes, it's a bore hole.
And basically what happens is
the bore holes are very deep.
And so it's like they then have
offshoots of water systems.
That's one of them.
And then the little kiosks,
where the families and the kids
can get water.
So this is right at the school.
>>LISA: So they dig
deep into the ground.
>>CYNTHIA: It's very deep.
That's right.
>>LISA: They dig these holes and
pump it out from the pressure.
>>CYNTHIA: Well, so
we do it hand in hand.
So we have staff and
people on the ground that
work with the communities to
create this and then maintain
it, because that's
another big part of it.
>>LISA: And then they
can build gardens?
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
Yes, flourishing gardens.
>>LISA: Another great
picture here of--
>>CYNTHIA: Oh, yeah.
Isn't that great?
>>LISA: --in their
gardens, and they're
actually growing their own food.
And they have access to
clean and healthy food
in that particular
region, which is amazing.
Now, we haven't talked about
the part where you actually
educate them on how
to make an income.
And this is specifically
with the women, right?
>>CYNTHIA: Right.
Well, it starts with the women.
But what happens is--
because in the beginning,
the men aren't interested.
But when they start seeing
the women coming together,
and basically they have this
thing called a Merry Go Round.
So every single week,
they bring a little-- I'll
bring a shilling, and
she'll bring a shilling.
We pool our money together.
And then one mom gets to
take the money for the month.
So as this process
continues, they're
able to buy things that are
necessary for the family, buy
seed and grain
for their gardens.
They have their own
gardens at their home.
They call it a kitchen garden.
So that's where they go out
and they get their food.
But eventually it
allows them to even buy
bricks and things to
build their own homes.
And the men start
seeing what's happening,
and they're like, we
want to do that, too.
So now we have men's groups that
are thriving in their learning,
because basically the
women are then buying land
to be able to build
more schools or to be
able to expand the community.
>>LISA: To put the
land towards good use.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: Curiously, why are
the men put off when you come?
Why is that?
>>CYNTHIA: Well,
it's not all of them.
It's really not all of them.
But it is a cultural thing.
So when we're there, the men
that are there are committed.
So they're the ones that
are-- they're the leaders.
They're the chiefs
in the community.
>>LISA: Oh, great.
>>CYNTHIA: Yes.
So they're absolutely committed.
I met a man who had-- I
think he had 12 children,
and he made sure that every
single one of his children
not only went to primary
school, but they ended up
going to secondary school.
That was unheard
of, because that
means he had to find
a secondary school
and send those children away.
>>LISA: To live, basically.
>>CYNTHIA: Yes, to be
able to go to school.
But that was a very high value.
So obviously he's a
leader in the community.
>>LISA: He was a leader.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: So that's important.
So he was a leader.
And so the men who
basically were standoffish
were maybe threatened
by the situation.
>>CYNTHIA: They could be.
That's right.
Exactly.
They're community members.
But as they start seeing
what's happening-- plus women
play a very subservient
role in the communities.
So now all of a
sudden, the women--
>>LISA: Culturally.
>>CYNTHIA: --that's right--
are earning money and feeling
more empowered.
They can be threatened by them,
but a lot of men are thinking,
this is fantastic.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Absolutely, because
it contributes
to the lack of survival.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: We have a picture
here that you've given us
of the vans where--
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah, there it is.
>>LISA: --you bring
in the vans, and kids
can get access to vitamins,
health care, as you said,
certain vaccinations.
And there's also here a
picture of the school.
This is one of the
schools that you built.
>>CYNTHIA: I love this.
Yeah, it is.
>>LISA: They're running.
>>CYNTHIA: I know.
I love this.
In our schools, the children
actually run to school.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>CYNTHIA: And it's not because
it's an exercise program.
They're doing it because
they so value it.
And what's amazing about
these children, Lisa,
is after school you'll see
hundreds of children walking
hours, sometimes a
couple of hours a day.
>>LISA: Home?
>>CYNTHIA: Home.
One of the schools
that we had, they
had to actually
move it because it
was right in the
path of the elephant.
>>LISA: Wild animals?
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
So the kids were
in danger, so they
had to actually move
the entire school.
So they're in the middle
of the Maasai Mara, where
there's all sorts
of wild animals
and-- So these children
are walking, some of them,
a couple of hours every
single day, one way,
to go to school, because
it's so important to them.
>>LISA: You have a picture here
of one of the children walking,
and at home he
studies by candlelight
to stay awake to do it.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
They get to school,
they get there,
they leave their house
early, they get home late.
They have to do chores.
They have to help.
And then they're doing their
studies by candlelight.
>>LISA: There's another
woman here, Susan.
We actually have a
picture of you with her.
And I love the story.
She was the 41st girl.
What does that mean?
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
So basically, so we helped
fund the first secondary school
in this particular area.
>>LISA: And that's grades?
>>CYNTHIA: Secondary
is nine through 12.
So primary is K through eight.
And so Susan, just to kind of go
back a little bit of her story,
there's two times in her life
where her life was really
saved by the help of a stranger.
The first time was
when she was born.
And her mother did what,
probably the kindest thing
that she could do
based on her resources.
And instead of abandoning
her in a field where
she would be killed, she took
her to a community marketplace
and left her there in the hopes
that somebody would find her.
So here's Susan, this
little teeny baby, days old.
And Monica is a mother
of eight children.
And she sees this baby
crying in the marketplace,
and she picks up the
baby, she holds the baby.
And she takes her home.
Now, she doesn't have the money.
She doesn't have the space.
But what's she gonna do?
So she takes the baby home.
Every single week,
she brings Susan,
the baby, back to
the marketplace,
hoping to find her mom.
She never does.
So again, she doesn't
have the room.
She doesn't have the resources.
But she decided that Susan
would be her ninth child.
And Monica was an
amazing, empowered woman.
So even though the situation
with the women in the Maasai
Mara-- you know, not that
many people who are women
are able to actually leave.
They're stuck in that cycle.
But she told every
one of her children
that they could do
whatever they really
dreamed that they could do
and that education is the key.
So Susan was raised
with that and believed
that she was going
to work really hard,
and she had this dream
to become a doctor.
So she's top at her field.
>>LISA: It's great
that she had a dream.
>>CYNTHIA: She had
a dream, seriously.
And so she's studying hard,
she's getting great grades,
and she is just really
hoping that when
it's time to apply to go
to Kisaruni High School
that she's accepted.
The challenge is
for that first year,
there was only
room for 40 girls.
It's a boarding school.
So the first, you know, the
ninth grade year, 40 beds,
40 desks, 40 chairs, 40 girls.
That's it.
>>LISA: And how do
those girls get in?
How do they choose the 40?
>>CYNTHIA: Well, they do tests.
So they're testing them, and
they do interviews and things
like that.
So they all studied.
Susan was a little
apprehensive but confident.
And the very last day
of primary school,
they all got their results.
And Susan found out that
she was not accepted.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>CYNTHIA: And she was
devastated, because she knew--
>>LISA: It was her dream.
>>CYNTHIA: That's
her dream, and guess
what does that mean--
she's not going
to be able to continue
to go to school.
She'll end up getting married,
and the cycle just continues.
So when the next school year
began, Susan could not-- like,
she couldn't sleep.
She couldn't let it go.
So she goes when this
classroom starts again.
And in the distance, she
sees these 40 little girls
in their uniforms,
and she's devastated.
And as she got closer,
the teacher and the girls
could see that Susan is walking
to the class, to their school.
And the teacher said,
why are you here?
And Susan said,
I heard about it.
I had to hear it for myself.
And the teacher said, I'm sorry,
but you were the 41st girl.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>CYNTHIA: And she said
she felt like-- one girl.
She felt like somebody just
punched her in the stomach.
And she said that she
tried to be strong
and she tried to be brave,
but of course the tears
started flowing.
And the little
girls were shocked
because they knew if it weren't
for them being in school,
they would be just like Susan.
So what happened is the girls
surrounded Susan, just like,
you know, holding her up.
And one of the girls
said, don't send her way.
We will move our beds together.
We'll share our desks.
We'll share our books.
>>LISA: My goodness.
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah.
Please let her stay.
And that year, because
not only of the support
of the Unstoppable
Foundation that helped
fund the school but people who
helped fund Susan's education,
she became the 41st girl.
And here she is now.
She's graduating
this year in January.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>CYNTHIA: And look at her.
Again, it goes back to
your question, Lisa,
of what does education
mean for one child?
It means everything.
It's like, now she's
going to continue.
>>LISA: She'll go to college,
which means so much to her.
>>CYNTHIA: She'll go to college.
That's right.
>>LISA: But I do think
that it's admirable
that you guys actually
tracked her story
and you followed
her that closely
and brought that story back,
because that means that you are
in it, you are following
through, you are on the ground.
>>CYNTHIA: Oh, yeah.
We see her every year.
So I met her when she was in the
ninth grade and the 10th grade.
>>LISA: Very cool.
>>CYNTHIA: Yeah, exactly.
Let's take a look at this
video here about believing.
So take a look.
>>CYNTHIA: OK, good.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-I believe I can fly.
You want to know why?
I've flown in an airplane.
I believe I can go to the
moon, because in school I
learned about astronauts.
I believe that
every kid out there
deserves to know
the things I know.
I believe that if every kid had
the chance to learn like me,
I'm pretty sure together
we can change the world.
I just had to find a way to
get the message out there.
I hope they get the message.
-There are millions
of children who
have a right to learn but
no way to be educated,
millions of children
who have a right
to clean water, health care,
sound nutrition, and hope
for a real future; millions of
children with the same needs
and rights as you and me.
They're just waiting for
the world to get the message
and then do something about it.
One message from me.
One message from you.
One simple message.
Until we've made sure that
every girl and boy gets
to learn and to
dream, until we've
change the world by changing
the lives of its children,
we will not stop.
We are Unstoppable.
Join us.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: OK, so you have
been at this for six years,
and you've done an enormous
amount in six years.
And I am really, really
happy about the fact
that you share these
stories with us,
because we know that this
foundation goes directly
to where it's needed,
which is amazing,
which I love in
speaking with you.
>>CYNTHIA: Thank you.
>>LISA: I really see that.
I see it in your eyes,
which is incredible,
how much you love
and care about this.
So now you're starting
another level,
where you're getting
it into social media.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: Explain that.
>>CYNTHIA: So basically, you
know, it took us five years.
We've been at this
now six years,
and we're educating
6,500 children a day.
>>LISA: A day?
>>CYNTHIA: A day.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CYNTHIA: And every time
I come back, Lisa, it's
like-- from Kenya and
seeing these kids,
it's like, I've got to do more.
We've got to kick it up.
>>CYNTHIA: And to
give some context,
it took us five years
to get to the level
of 5,000 children a day.
And basically, when I came home
from Kenya a few months ago,
I started seeing on Facebook
this Ice Bucket Challenge,
and I thought, you
know, what is this?
And my initial idea was, I
hope I don't get challenged.
The only thing I thought
was I hope nobody-- please,
don't challenge me, because
I don't want ice on my head.
But as I started--
continued to follow it,
I was blown away by
what was happening.
And of course I
did get challenged.
Mary Morrissey challenged me.
And I was happy to do
it, and I donated money.
But the biggest
thing I really got
is witnessing what happens
when a lot of people
come together and
do a little bit.
And I think, to me, it
shifted my paradigm.
That ice bucket
shifted my paradigm
about what was possible
and how long it actually
takes to be able to
raise this kind of money.
So our initial idea and
goal was to do, in one year,
to educate another 5,000
children, which is still
a pretty aggressive goal.
But I saw that Ice
Bucket Challenge,
and I thought,
you know, we could
do this in five months
or even five weeks.
>>LISA: They did, didn't they?
>>CYNTHIA: Well, they did.
I mean, they did in one month.
It took some time to build.
But after they were really
building, it took-- in 30 days,
they raised $100 million.
And over 3 million
videos were created,
and over 30 million
people were engaged
either liking it or
commenting on it.
And every one of those people
contributed to that success.
>>LISA: Yes, true.
Yes.
And that's the power
of social media.
It goes viral so fast.
It really can.
So what are you up to?
What are you doing?
>>CYNTHIA: So bottom line
is, we got inspired by that.
And we kind of got
together and really started
looking at how could
we create something
that would be consistent
with who we are?
And we kept hearing,
you know, the theme was
there are people
in our lives who,
because of who they are
and their impact on us,
has significantly impacted
where we are today.
And the overwhelming desire
to be able to thank them.
And so we came up with the idea
of the Unstoppable Hero Toast.
And the concept
is really simple.
It's first off, you know,
grab your smartphone
and toast your hero.
Raise a glass and toast
somebody in your life
who has given to
you, who's believed
in you, who's encouraged
you, pushed you.
So just raise a glass and
toast and acknowledge them.
Number two is to become a hero.
So the way that you do that
is kind of paying it forward.
It's like, thank you.
My hero-- I have many-- but
the one that I did the video on
was Bob Proctor.
It's like, thank you for
what you've done in my life.
And really to acknowledge
you and pay it forward,
I went to my own site, and I
am educating three children.
So it's $1 a day, so that's
$3 a day, $91 a month.
And those three kids are
getting an education,
really I think, in
honor of Bob Proctor
and really the influence
he's made in my life.
And then the third piece is that
we nominate three people, three
colleagues, to toast
their hero and become
a hero in the next 24 hours.
>>LISA: So you-- you
have-- you toasted--
we're going to take a
look here at the video.
Let's take a look at
Cynthia toasting her hero.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Hi, I'm Cynthia Kersey with
the Unstoppable Foundation.
Welcome to the
Unstoppable Hero Toast.
I'm so excited to share with you
this wonderful campaign that's
gonna make such a difference.
But before I give
you the details,
I want to give you a little
bit about the back story.
The first week of
August, I just got back
from visiting our
work in Kenya, where
we met many of
the 6,000 children
that are getting an
education, they're
getting access to clean water,
health care, nutritious meal
every single day,
and their parents
are learning to
generate an income, so
that the entire program that
we're delivering to them
will become self-sustaining.
So it was powerful.
It was inspiring.
And yet we left talking to
communities and parents who
were still waiting for their
children to get an education.
So on one hand, it's inspiring.
On the other hand,
it's heartbreaking.
So we came back even
more determined than ever
to get more children educated
in this particular part
of the world in the
sub-Sahara Africa.
So I get back and
I'm on Facebook,
and I start hearing about
the Ice Bucket Challenge.
And my initial
reaction was, you know,
gosh, I hope I don't
get challenged,
because the last thing
I want is somebody
to dump a bucket of
ice water on my head.
But as the days progressed and
actually the weeks progressed,
I shifted, because I was blown
away by the amount of money
and the amount of people that
were engaged in this campaign.
Did you know that
in a 30-day period,
at the height of this campaign,
they raised $100 million?
The prior year, same time
period, $2.8 million.
Over 2 and 1/2 million people
posted videos on Facebook,
and over 30 million people
were engaged in some level,
even if they were just
liking it or writing
a comment on Facebook.
And the thing I
really got about that
is what happens when you
give somebody an easy way
to support a cause that's fun,
that certainly it was funny,
it was shocking.
But people innately care.
And so I thought,
you know, there's
no reason why we can't, as an
Unstoppable community, come up
with something that's
fun, that's engaging,
and that will help us
educate the next 5,000
children in a fraction
of the amount of time.
So I called some supporters
with Unstoppable.
We all came together, and
we started brainstorming.
And the number one
common thread that I
heard from every single
person was that they all
had somebody who believed
in them, who supported them,
even prodded them to
step up in their life.
And this feeling of
overwhelming gratitude.
And their desire just to
acknowledge this person.
And that's really how
the Unstoppable Hero
Toast was born.
And basically, the
concept is three steps.
Number one, toast your hero.
So pour your favorite beverage.
It could be a Starbucks latte.
It could be a sparkling water.
It could be a glass of
champagne or some concoction
that you create--
it doesn't matter.
Raise a glass and publicly
acknowledge your hero--
that person who spent time
with you, that person who
believed in you,
and because of that,
you are who you are
fundamentally today,
because they were a hero to you.
So you're going to
toast your hero.
Number two, you're
going to become a hero.
So the way that you
can become a hero
is to donate money
to help educate
a child through the
Unstoppable Foundation.
It's $1 a day.
So I don't care if you donate
$1; you're making a difference.
And you're helping us
create this viral campaign
so that other people can
be able to toast their hero
and become a hero as well.
So step number three is you
nominate three friends to toast
their hero and become a hero
as well on a video, right,
and just share it
with other people.
So that's really the concept.
And just by
participating in this,
we're hoping to
build more awareness
and by the end of the
year raise the money
to be able to educate
another 5,000 children.
So I would-- I encourage
every single one of you,
take two minutes-- that's all
it'll take-- toast your hero.
Become a hero.
Pledge to become a hero by going
to unstoppablefoundation.org,
making a donation.
It doesn't matter how
small or how large,
you're making a difference.
And then nominate three
friends to create their video,
toast their hero, and
become a hero as well.
And together, we will
absolutely change
the lives of 5,000--
at least 5,000 children
and feel fantastic about
acknowledging our hero
and also becoming a hero.
So thank you so much.
We're excited.
We can't wait to see your
toast and share with you
the stories of the
children whose lives are
changed because
you became a hero.
Thank you.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So this
is basically easy.
Every one of us have
somebody that we admire
or who has helped us in our
trajectory of our lives.
And so I'm going to do one,
because Wayne Dyer has been
a beautiful inspiration
to me in so many ways
and supported me
in so many ways.
And he's encouraged
me to write a book,
and he wrote the foreword
to it, with everything.
>>CYNTHIA: That's a great hero.
>>LISA: So I will toast my hero.
And I want him to know that,
because I can't tell him enough
how much he's helped me.
And then make a contribution
towards the Unstoppable
Foundation.
And then pay it forward
to three more people.
>>CYNTHIA: Nominating three
people to do the same thing,
toast their hero
and become a hero.
Yay!
>>LISA: I got it.
I got it.
>>CYNTHIA: Easy.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Well, this
is a huge initiative.
And you've already done so much.
I have no doubt that this
will catch on as well,
because it is paying it forward.
It's allowing people
to be saying--
to be in gratitude,
first of all.
Then to contribute,
which we understand
the benefits of giving, which
we don't even need benefits of.
>>CYNTHIA: And even $1.
As simple as $1 will
educate a child for a day.
So it's not an amount--
some people can give more,
and some people can't.
But it's just the energetic of
saying, I want to be a hero.
I'm going to educate a child
for a day, a month, a year,
whatever you can do.
>>LISA: And then call
out three more people
who I know that want
to be heroes as well.
>>CYNTHIA: That's right.
>>LISA: [INAUDIBLE].
Absolutely.
>>CYNTHIA: There you go.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
You are such an inspiration.
You are.
You truly walk your talk.
And you have such a huge heart.
You have a huge heart.
>>CYNTHIA: You do, too.
And it takes a village
to sponsor a village
and change the world.
So thank you for
being a part of this
and helping us spread
the world-- word
and get more children educated.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
It makes me feel good to
be a part of it as well.
So thank you so much.
And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Cynthia Kersey or
share it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.